<h2>Assignment 1 - Assessing Data Analytics</h2>
<h3>Overview</h3>
It was interesting for me that the two classes I took in Data Analytics were among the most enjoyable that I experienced here at WTAMU, but they were also among the least relevant to what I do day-to-day as web developer (even as a full stack developer). Maybe that's why I enjoyed them so much, a chance to try new technologies; but also, a chance to consider how data could be used to enhance my development, outside of just CRUD operations. In particular, when taking CIDM 6308 Seminar in Data Analytics – the chance to use Tableau and RapidMiner (both completely new to me at the time) was very eye-opening, waking me up to ideas about how data could be used to tell stories and target problems.
 
The fact remains though, that Data Analytics is the weakest area for me professionally, simply because I don’t often use the associated tools and techniques.
 
<h3>What Do I Know</h3>
__Descriptive Analytics__ In our Data Analytics Seminar, descriptive analytics was defined as “summarizing and reporting data…geared toward what is currently happening or what has already happened.” This sort of analytics is core to my job, and I generate multiple reports per month, some that run on a recurring basis, some that are for ad hoc analysis. Yesterday, in fact, I created a report that aggregated all scheduled transactions for deferred income payments for orders associated with a specific company (over 27,000 transactions). This week I also created a report of registered attendees for our fall conference that will be used to print badges for the conference on-site.
 
Diagnostic Analytics. “It is geared towards exploring and finding the reasons or causes and it is geared towards why something happened.” Perhaps this is a stretch, but I do often use data to troubleshoot problems or poor performance in web applications (though admittedly, not as much in business operations).  
 
Excel. I’m not sure if this is something to properly consider a strength, but I am fluent in Excel and use it for much of the reporting mentioned above. Even if I do most of my data collection and manipulation using SQL, I use Excel to format reports, massage data, create pivot tables, etc.
 
User Stories. Few things that I encountered in this program intrigued me more than the idea of user stories – using data for storytelling to construct compelling business cases. The course I took on this – CIDM 6312 Seminar in Information Visualization (and the accompanying textbook) stressed the importance of presenting data in ways that both inform and inspire. Immediately after completing this class, I built a website at work that visualized membership details for specialty groups offered by our organization (https://spgreports.aanp.org). While I wouldn’t exactly say this is a strength for me, it is an area where I’m continually looking for ways to integrate it into my work.
 
<h3>Where I Am Weak</h3>
Tools. As mentioned, in the Data Analytics seminar I was blown away by the power of both Tableau and RapidMiner. Unfortunately, I have not used either since. In fairness, the type of big data analysis that RapidMiner facilitate is miles away from anything I’m currently doing (or plan to do in the future); but I have proposed on a few occasions that our organization get a subscription to Tableau. As of yet, they have not, but we have just recently started using Power BI (we are a Microsoft shop), which is a nice alternative, so I’m hoping more data visualization is in my future.
 
Right now, though, my familiarity with the tools is weak. Even the visualization website that I created (mentioned above), I built a React UI that incorporates a JavaScript package called Recharts.js; it is a nice solution, but not capable of the powerful visualizations you would get from Tableau or Power BI.  
 
Predictive/Prescriptive Analytics. Once data analytics get past reporting and troubleshooting, into the areas of using data to predict what will occur or even influence what will occur, I’m totally out of my depth. Both in the tools and in the math, not to mention that I don’t currently work with a dataset large enough to accommodate this level of analysis (although my organization does have a relatively large dataset, maybe 600,000 entries in our main entity). That is not to say it wouldn’t be helpful in what I do; my organization would be thrilled if I could provide them with some member engagement models that would help drive membership renewals, but as of now this sort of analysis is beyond my skillset.
 
<h3>What I Wish I Knew and Didn’t Realize I was Missing</h3>
In a few different classes I manipulated and presented data using Python and Jupyter Notebooks. This was very powerful, and I have to admit, would be useful in my work. I recently got a dataset from a customer with about 2000 records that was very ‘dirty’ and included a lot duplicates (many of which were hard to identify). This is a case where Python and related libraries could’ve really helped. Again, unfortunately, in my work I don’t have much cause to use Python (or Jupyter Notebooks); as noted, we are a Microsoft shop, so my core programming skill is C#, though in recent years I’ve been doing a lot with React. Basic Python skills related to data analysis would be extremely helpful.
 
<h3>Integration</h3>
In recent years, data analytics has been “all the rage” in the tech world, especially in the way data is used to drive business processes. This has been overshadowed lately by the role big data has played in training large language models for AI. In fact, it seems like data analytics in general is going to become a more specialized field that leans heavily on AI, and so the reasons why it is integrable into the other areas are getting a little murky. However, clearly data analysis is crucial to proper design and deployment of software, keeping them secure, and deciding how to store the data you are using. In fact, AI might make data analytics more accessible to developers like myself, helping us to make smarter decisions about how we design our applications.
 
For me, personally, data analytics will take on more importance if I stay in my current position. Our organization is moving to Salesforce (a large-scale CRM), and away from home-brewed applications; rather than cranking out code, I will probably be asked to find ways to leverage the data and tools within Salesforce to improve business ops.
